this is a chart of the 2008 financial
crisis over the course of 517 days the
stock market dropped by more than 56%
millions of people lost their jobs their
homes and their life savings it was the
worst time for the global economy since
the Great Depression now this is the
20/20 economic collapse so far over the
course of just 21 days the market has
dropped by roughly 20% the world has
seemingly shut down and we just might be
on the worst economic trajectory in
history so how did we get here and what
could we expect going forward well let's
start off with the first part you see
the first thing as most of you know is
that there is a global illness going
around that many people are worried
about and from my previous videos you
might know that my position on this is
that if you get the disease you will
almost certainly be fine but it is
disproportionately bad for the elderly
and those with underlying health
conditions such as myself so it's good
to be cautious on a social level but
also there isn't a need for you to panic
on an individual level initially when
the disease had its first outbreak in
China it caused the Chinese government
to shut down its manufacturing sector in
order to help prevent the spread of the
virus now that wouldn't be a problem if
one third of all products weren't made
in China
you see China is the global supply chain
of the world so when China experiences
delays in production the entire world's
economy experiences delays as well now I
made a whole video on this which you can
check out on my channel but I want to
dive into deep detail in this video but
anyways because of the supply chain
slowdown we have seen many large
companies experience a slowdown in their
sales and revenue and that makes sense
because if you don't have your product
to sell well then you can't make any
sales and can't make any money and
here's an example the car industry is
very dependent on tools dye and
machinery in order to manufacture their
cars but each one of these necessities
for the car industry is experiencing a 1
to 3 month delay because of the Chinese
shut down of the manufacturing sector
now this means that car companies will
not be able to launch their new annual
vehicles on time
therefore missing out on
billions of dollars worth of sales and
also because people are being asked to
stay inside they're missing out on some
wages they're trying to be cautious and
work from home as possible because of
those things we've seen an 80 percent
drop in automotive sales in countries
like China and this effect trickles down
you see if car companies are seeing a
drop in sales and revenue then so will
its suppliers and if the suppliers see a
drop in revenue then so both the raw
industries that work with the suppliers
and this effect radiates to all other
companies that are connected to the
automotive industry and what else
happens when a company sees a drop in
sales or revenue well we tend to see
things like layoffs or even bankruptcies
and those things lead to a higher
unemployment rate which would lead to
less purchases being made by consumers
which would lead to less sales being
made by businesses and this cycle
continues until the economy hits a low
point like the Great Recession or the
Great Depression now keep in mind that
this is just the automotive industry
example that I'm given the drop in sales
that I talked about will apply to
virtually every other industry in the
world except the toilet paper industry
because that's actually manufactured in
a bunch of different countries around
the world yet sales have increased for
some companies like KP tissue by almost
50% in the last few weeks so there is no
toilet paper shortage everyone it's just
a bunch of foreigners buying a hundred
rolls at a time and large retailers just
can't restock the shelves fast enough
anyways
typically from the time that we begin to
see a slowdown in sales from worldwide
companies to the time where we
experience massive layoffs defaults on
loans and bankruptcies it can be
anywhere between two and 24 months I
mean to think about this the Great
Recession began in December of 2007 but
it took until September of 2008 in order
for the worst parts of the recession to
begin to be felt and it was in March of
2009 when things were at their worst
that's a period of about 15 months in
order for the recession to hit rock
bottom so what I'm trying to say here is
that even though we made on experience
in economic downturn in the next few
weeks we will almost certainly
experience some sort of negative
consequences in the next 24 months so
the Great Recession might not be the
best comparison for what we're going
through
today because that was caused by a
combination of banks insurance companies
and investors that created massive flaws
in the financial system the most
comparable economic downturn to the one
that we are seeing today it was probably
the recession of 2001 except the one
that we're going through today is on a
much larger scale you see in 2001 there
was a rapid drop in stock prices after
half decade-long bull market there was
also a crisis that slowed down to the
world's economy which was 9/11 and there
was a temporary ban on air travel in
many countries throughout the world now
these aren't the exact same as to what
we're seeing today but it is the most
comparable recession in terms of causes
and in 2001 what we saw is that the
effects of the recession caused an
eight-month economic downturn and
doubled the unemployment rate to about
6% but again the thing is that what
we're seeing today is much more extreme
than what we saw back then because today
we are seeing many more negative
economic indicators for example today
consumer debt has at a higher level than
it was during their session of even 2008
meaning that any economic downturn might
cause people to miss payments on their
debt and in turn create massive losses
for lenders similar to what happened in
2008 today stock market volatility which
is usually a sign of investors being
uncertain about an incoming economic
collapse is actually at the exact same
level as it was right before the 2008
recession which was extremely high there
are also two giant industries right now
in the airlines in the cruise lines that
are actually on the brink of bankruptcy
and no one is really talking about this
in fact I'm almost certain that if
people aren't able to travel again in
the next few weeks or a couple months
then we will see at least one major
airline go bankrupt or get bailed out in
fact it might even be all of them and
what is strange that this might be one
of the only bailouts that I have 100%
agreed with because it's due to an
unpredictable change in traveling laws
and regulations and not due to the
incompetence of the industry in fact if
you want to know how bad airlines are
getting hit right now take a WestJet for
example they're a fairly big airline
with 14,000 employees but they are
expected to layoff between 20 and 50
percent of their flight attendants in
the
next few weeks if air travel does not
return back to normal there was actually
an internal memo sent to the West jet
Union that said our Airlines well-being
has become grave overnight and there's
another industry Titan in American
Airlines that said it will be cutting
down its international flights by 75%
there's also Air Canada that gets
roughly 70% of their revenue from
international and US flights and those
flights are either empty or just not
happening right now and because of this
downturn and air travel there have been
spokespeople like Kristoff Hannah Bell
who represents Air Transat who have said
we are currently assessing the impact on
our operations and expect the government
to help Airlines and travel companies
whether these extraordinary
circumstances and as I mentioned earlier
the airline industry is not the only
industry getting hit right now of course
you've probably heard about a lot of the
other shutdowns like the businesses that
involve large gatherings of groups of
people these are the businesses like the
NBA NHL MLB MLS concerts comedy shows
conferences and much more and even
though each one of these businesses is
much smaller than some of the bigger
industries that we've already talked
about having all of these industries
take a hit at the same time will begin
to add up in ways that you don't think
about I mean for example have you
thought about the economic impact of
shutting down the NBA you might think
that the only people who will get hurt
are the players the owners maybe the
broadcaster's but that isn't true
because the people that will be most
affected are the arena workers who are
expecting to have a stable weekly
paycheck but all of a sudden have no
source of income now luckily many NBA
players and owners have offered to give
some help to the arena workers by
funding them until the NBA comes back
but the point here is that every single
shutdown of a business will likely have
an economic impact that most people
aren't thinking of and yes there's even
different kinds of companies that don't
draw in large or dense crowds that are
still shutting down for several weeks at
a time the best two examples are Nike
and Apple who have shut down all of
their stores in hopes to stop the spread
of the virus throughout the world and
even though these are big companies that
will be able to get through the shutdown
while still being able to pay all of its
workers there are still many
businesses were shutting down
temporarily or who are limiting store
hours who will be unable to pay their
hourly workers their expected wage and
what about the stores and small
businesses that do keep their doors open
during this time
well this early data is pretty
terrifying let's take the restaurant
business for example there are apps like
resi and open table which are used to
book tables at restaurants and they're
reporting that covers are down between
30 and 65 percent in areas like New York
and Washington and this one really hurts
me personally because picture all of the
mom-and-pop local restaurants and
businesses that are just being able to
get by and pay the bills and all of a
sudden this disease outbreak happens and
they might go out of business because
everyone is staying at home so all of
these points represent the case for an
incoming recession and there's a ton of
other points that are tough to quantify
such as businesses losing productivity
by having people work from home there
was a sharp drop in oil prices recently
- and there's a ton of other economic
indicators that signal a really bad
economy coming in the future but this
does not mean that a horrible recession
is for sure coming you see there are
ways to at least mitigate some of the
short-term consequences of a recession
for example one action that several
countries have done like Canada and the
United States is that they have set up a
loan program where small business owners
are able to take out interest-free loans
in hopes to prevent their businesses
from shutting down during the next six
to 12 months another thing is as
mentioned earlier using taxpayer money
to help bail out core infrastructure
companies such as Airlines might help
prevent large companies from going
bankrupt now I'm not saying to bail out
every single large company but core
infrastructure ones there's a good
debate for actually doing that another
tactic for whatever reason that no one
has mentioned so far is the Federal
Reserve is lending at one point five
trillion dollars
yes that was a trillion with a t they're
lending this money up to Wall Street and
the big banks now there is a complex
reasoning behind this called the repo
market and that would take an entire
video to explain properly but here's a
quick overview the United States banks
have taken out 1.5 trillion dollars
worth of loans in order to help get
through tough economic times where
Treasuries are less liquid it's
essentially a loan to help stabilize the
market now if the market does stabilize
with this injection that's a good thing
so the banks and market might not
collapse but if the market does not
stabilize with this injection all of a
sudden you will see a giant collapse on
Wall Street which was what happened in
2008 and if that didn't worry you enough
this method of lending to banks is kind
of viewed as the last resort to help
stabilize a market and prevent a
collapse now lastly another thing that
is done virtually every time there's an
economic slowdown is a reduction in
interest rates this is a very simple way
to make debt cheaper in hopes of
promoting spending that will kick start
to the economy and typically what you
see is that when times are going to be
good interest rates go up and when times
you're gonna be bad interest rates go
down now initially when I recorded this
video I talked about how the Federal
Reserve just did an emergency rate cut
down to one point two five percent but
in the last few minutes they just did
another emergency rate cut down to
essentially zero percent that is
something that you only saw during the
deepest parts of the 2008 recession and
so when I initially recorded this I was
going to say that they didn't want to
lower it down to 0% because they wanted
to have one more bullet in the chamber
to potentially help out the economy when
things start to get really bad but now
they just used that last bullet unless
they want to go to negative interest
rates which I don't know if they do but
Wow I can't believe that happened while
recording this video and even though
these measures might help prevent some
companies from going out of business or
having to do mass layoffs the one thing
that can't be prevented is the slowdown
of the economy that we have already
experienced in the last few weeks and
this will likely continue for the
foreseeable future
you see governmental action can only get
you so far during a recession at the end
of the day the only real way that we can
prevent or minimize this recession is to
have life return well back to normal for
the average person but that might not
happen for quite a while so buckle up be
prepared because we might be in for a
tough one
now I have a whole playlist of business
documentaries just like this so if you
like this video please click onto that
playlist and also I know everyone says
this please subscribe and leave a like
button I've been very very happy and
excited with this channels growth
recently and I'm just super happy and
very fortunate that all of you guys like
what I have to say so it does mean a lot
to me and yeah thank you everyone
so anyways make sure to click on that
playlist or the next video of mine and
I'll see you guys hopefully in a few
seconds
[Music]